Recreation in the Michaux State Forest

BACKGROUND:
  The Michaux State Forest is an 85,000 acre area covering the majority of South Mountain in Pennsylvania. The Michaux is culturally, historically, and geographically important. It is filled with cultural resources including remnents of the iron and logging industries, and a key section of the Appalachian Trail. South Mountain (poorly named) represents the northern terminus of the Blue Ridge Mountains, a 600 mile chain of mountains which include the Smokies and the Shenandoah, stretching from here in southern PA to Georgia and comprising the easternmost extent of the Appalachian range. The Blue Ridge is distinct from the rest of the Appalachians in both geography/topology (the western portions are known as the ridge-and-valley while the Blue Ridge has steeper, triangular peaks with shorter ridges), and culture (the Blue Ridge is the real soul of what it means to be Appalachian). South Mountain forms a hook shape centered around Gettysburg, and is historically signficant in that it was the end of the screen the Blue Ridge provided the Confederate army during the Civil War, propelling the meeting of the North and South at Gettysburg. The Michaux is home to Penn State Mont Alto Campus, one of the finest and the oldest forestry school in the country. Because of this, the Michaux is home to many forestry experiments, which is why you often find dense pine plantations sharply divided from hardwood forests, and seemingly random fences (used to test the growth of trees without the presence of deer and bears). The Michaux contains many weird things too. I've found burnt out cars, random shacks, there was a WWII Prisoner of War camp (unknown to the public until the '90s), countless unmarked trails that lead to deadends, etc. Don't get lost, bring plenty of water, some food, extra clothes, and do not expect cell service.

LINKS:
  Michaux DCNR Homepage: https://www.dcnr.pa.gov/StateForests/FindAForest/Michaux/Pages/default.aspx
  Public Use Map: http://elibrary.dcnr.pa.gov/GetDocument?docId=3253756&DocName=D01%20Michaux%20Public%20Use%20Map
  Mid-Atlantic Hikes (PA): http://www.midatlantichikes.com/pa.htm
  LNT: https://lnt.org/why/7-principles/
  Best map ($17 but 1000% worth): https://www.purplelizard.com/collections/maps/products/michaux-map
  PATC Cabins: https://www.patc.net/patc/cabins/Cabins.aspx


TERMINOLOGY/ABBREVIATIONS:
  Hollow: A small valley, with a stream flowing through the base, separating two mountains or ridges. Generally hollows start wide and low and narrow as they gain elevation into the surrounding upland.

  Pass: a sharp V-shaped cutout in a ridge generally where water flows out. 

  Blaze: The colored markings, spray painted on trees, to denote the route of a trail.

  AT: Appalachian Trail. 2200 mile extremely famous long trail, 36 miles of which (including the halfway point in Pine Grove Furnace SP) are contained within the Michaux. The AT is the only trail blazed in white.

  PATC: Patomac Appalachian Trail Club. Rents out cabins in the Michaux and handles maintence and care of the trail in Northern VA, WV, MD, and Southern PA. 

  DCNR: Pennsylvania Department of Conservation of Natural Resources. Managing body of the PA State Forest system.

DAY HIKES:

  ROCKY KNOB TRAIL (4 mi):
    Parking: Either on Birch Run road at the northern tip of Long Pine Run Reservoir or on Ridge Road. I suggest birch run, though that lot is generally more crowded, the south connector trail is more interesting.

    Route: Starting from the south connector trailhead, you begin at the confluence of Birch Run (heading north east) and Knob Run (heading northwest), immediately before their outlet into Long Pine Run Reservoir. The South connector trail follows Knob Run up the valley between Rocky Knob to the right and Mitten and Wolf hill to the left. As you climb, Rocky Knob's Steep southwestern face exhibits a large glaciated boulder field. It is possible to summit rocky knob easily, however any trails there have been closed due to an abundance of rattlesnakes. The summit is small and, well rocky. The south connector meets the Rocky Knob Loop, the main section of the hike. This loop (going counter clockwise from 6-o'clock) traverses over Sier Hill, the second higest peak in Adams County, and exhibits a few distinct vistast, most interestingly looking back over rocky knob and the reservoir nearly 700' below. The north connector is a bit shorter, and fairly boring, though it crosses the Appalachian trail and is a good connection for longer hikes. The trail is covered mostly with hardwood forests, though the beginning of the south connector is heavily coniferous, there are dense rhododendron tunnels throughout. 

  ASTRO-CANADA (8.5 mi):
    Parking: There are two places to park, both on Ridge Road. I suggest parking at the parking area #2 on the associated map, it is a large multi-way intersection that has plenty of room to park. The fegley road intersection is arguably a better way to do the hike but there is occasional logging I've seen in the area and only room to pull off for one car.

    Route: Starting from the Fegley Road intersection, the route begins on Fegley Road, an old logging haul road that is mostly just a grass path. The road meets a 4-way intersection with one of the corners cut and a bit of a clearing that can be confusing. The beginning of Astronomy Trail is marked with a post and the trail is blazed in red. The first turn can be hidden so if you stop seeing red blazes or continue on a road instead of trail, turn back and make sure you're going the right way. Astronomy trail traverses a narrow two mile ridge that extends northwest pointing toward Cumberland Valley, with Reservoir Hollow to the left and Thompson Hollow to the right. The views from Astronomy ridge are pretty good, no wide open vistas, but Midnight Ridge is sharp and craggy to the right and Cumberland Valley begins to open up in front. The trail concludes with a short but steep descent of about 400' vertical. Make a left turn and walk gradually uphill on the gravel Milesburn Road for about 3/4 of a mile. Canada Hollow road and trail connect to the right at a small bridge over a creek. Either the road or the trail will bring you to where you need to go but the trail is much more exciting. The climb up Canada hollow is fairly arduous, and the trail can be ambiguous with several forks that are unmarked. I suggest using a phone app (Hiking Project) with GPS to guess at which forks to take and just try to shoot for the many-way intersection of Milesburn and Ridge roads with the AT. The steepest part of the trail is on a fairly wide logging road, as you leave Canada Hollow you emerge into an open, recently logged section that provides great views of Cumberland Valley to the west and the surrounding Hollows. Once you reach the intersection, you take the AT north, down a sharp descent, and past Milesburn Cabin (there is a potable spring marked in blue near the cabin). The AT continues up the northern face of Big Flat Ridge through dense pine plantations. Eventually, you meet Fegley road again at a powerline cut through. Take a left and meet back up with the car.

  BUCK RIDGE-VISTA-CANYON (9-9.4 mi):
    Parking: Either park near Fuller Lake or Laurel Lake in Pine Grove Furnace State Park. There is plenty of parking at both. Near Fuller lake is the Pine Grove General Store (I believe cash only). The general store hosts the "Half Gallon Challenge", because the state park represents the halfway point of the Appalachian trail, hikers are challenged to eat a half gallon of ice cream. They have food, it's okay for a general store in the middle of nowhere. 

    Route: Beginning at the Laurel Lake parking lot: cross PA233/Pine Grove Road to Cold Springs Road, then turn right on Moutain Creek road. follow mountain creek road for about 3/4 of a mile. It will make a large C-shaped bend, at the top of the "C" an unmarked trail ascends along a rocky ridge. This trail has several forks that are not marked, again using Hiking Project or the Purple Lizard Map will help. If you start descending, you are probably going the wrong direction. After less than a mile the trail flattens out a bit but is still generally uphill. The first unnamed vista (simply reffered to as Vista), is about 3/4 of a mile from leaving Mountain Creek road in a copse of pitch pine (the pine trees which grow twisty and flattened). This vista looks south west over Mountain Creek Valley. Little Rocky Ridge is the smaller ridge visible in the distance in front of Big Hill which is cut on the northern end by a sharp pass. Along the trail note the almond shaped, 20' long sections where the trail splits in two and rejoins itself. These are for mountain bikers who need to get off the trail to patch tires, pass each other, etc. These are trails made by mountain bikers, so respect them if you see them. After the first vista, you will pass two right hand turns/forks. There is another vista known as Canyon which is reachable via either of these forks. It looks north up Mountain Creek valley and is less impressive. A loop goes from the first fork to the second, though it is possible to skip by just continuing on the original unnamed trail. Eventually the trail hits a grass road, turn left here and hit a gravel road - Cold Spring road. It is a pretty good road walk down past some beautiful cabins if you want to call it early. Directly across Cold Spring is the beginning of Buck Ridge Trail. This heads south west along the base of buck ridge toward Little Rocky Ridge. After about 3.4 miles, the trail hits PA233/Centerville Road. Here you must carefully cross that and Pine Grove Road again. The Fuller Lake/PGF General store area is at this intersection. To get back to Laurel Lake, there are a few options including the gravel/paved (and difficult to say) Old Railroad Bed Road, or Mountain Creek Trail. Pick up a map of PGFSP as a souvenier and a guide to get back to the car, about 3 miles away. 